One of my favorite tools, after Mockito, for when running tests is AssertJ.
A colleague introduced me to AssertJ a couple of years ago,
and I have been hooked on it ever since.
I briefly used AssertJ in a couple of other modules in this course,
either directly or through a Spring testing tool.
In this section, I will more formally introduce the tool.
AssertJ seeks to improve on the process of asserting in JUnit tests by
making several readability and usability enhancements.
Let's take a look at how JUnit handles asserting to
understand the difficulties it presents.
Probably the most frequently used JUnit assertion is assertEquals.
I have always found assertEquals a little confusing to work with.
Personally,
I feel it's more intuitive to have the actual value first
and the expected value second; however,
assertEquals actually works by having the expected value
first and the actual value second.
This has caused me much confusion in the past when a test fails and
it gives a backwards assertion failure message.
Unfortunately,
with assertEquals simply taking in a couple of objects as arguments,
there's no easy way to declare which way the comparison is taking place.
Another frustration when using native JUnit
assertions is they have multiple roots.
There is of course assertEquals, but also assertNull,
assertNotNull, assertTrue, and many others.
Since I typically have Eclipse organize my imports on save,
when I wanted to use a different assertion type,
I would often have to update my or JUnit static import.
It's not a major impediment, but it can be annoying.
AssertJ, however, improves upon both of these weaknesses.
In AssertJ, all assertions begin with assertThat.
Immediately, it becomes clear where the actual value we're asserting belongs.
From there, AssertJ provides many different options for testing the actual value.
Of course, there is isEqualTo EXPECTED,
but all the usual JUnit options are provided as well,
such as isNotNull, isEmpty, isNotEqualTo,
isTrue, and many others.
AssertJ also makes the process of validating it against lists easier as well,
which we will take a look at in the demo.
Since learning about AssertJ,
I pretty much use it exclusively when writing tests.
In the following demo, we're going to look at using JUnit 5 and AssertJ, along with some other practices, to make tests that are more readable.